IN TE OD U OT] ΟΝ. xvii

In Act V, which consists osone short scene, the
Miles is discovered in the house of Periplecomenus,
and aster a sound cudgelling is allowed to escape
only after he has taken an oath that he will not
attempt to seek any satisfaction for the injuries he
has incurred. Sceledrus discloses to the Miles that
the pretended skipper was no other than the lover of
Philocomasium, gives his verdict for the poetical
justice of the ddnommwt, and points out the moral
lesson to be drawn from the play.

It will be seen thus that the play is not well con-
structed. The whole of the second act might have
been omitted, as dealing with a very minor inci—
dent. The third is nearly all surplusage—even the
interview between Pleusicles and the Miles which is
contemplated in vv. 805-813 comes to nought; nor
does Pleusicles meet the llliles after this until he
appears disguised as the nauclerus. It is the very
great cleverness of the dialogue, and the vigour
with which the characters, especially the female
characters, are drawn, which has secured for the
,Miles Gloriosus so leading a position among the

κ plays of Plautus.

Acroteleutium closely resembles Fidicina and Acro-
polistis in the Epidicus, as regards her cleverness,
her impudence‚ and her candid avowal of complete
depravity. Plautus does not fail to express his con-
demnation of her class in verse 786:

Quoique sapiat pectus ε nam cor non potest quod nulla habet,

Just as in the Cistellaria i. 1. 66 Gymnasium asks:

unde est tibi cordolium, obsecro,
quod neque-ego habeo neque quisquam alia mulier ut perhibent
um.
In her cynical avowal of depravity, Acroteleutium
may be classed with Cleaereta in the Asinaria, and

B

